Work constructed in the new Britain branch offices is well underway.
A Theocratic project of this size is no small task.
It involves challenges.
What were some of those challenges?
How did those involved feel?
And what can we learn from that?
The branch facilities, an unusual entity,
a mixture of working, living, volunteers,
all on one property, that doesn't occur very often if ever.
The common thread that people told us,
planning officers or councillors
where we made inquiries about a specific site was
you will never get a site anywhere in Britain
where you get that combination in one planning application.
From a human viewpoint, it was just a complete conflict
of normal criteria.
We searched the country far and wide to try to find a council
that was keen to follow the model that was needed for Bethel.
Amazingly, after almost three years
of searching for suitable properties,
having looked at over 300 sites,
we only came up with three that met the criteria.
It was in 2011 that we looked at a site
in the Essex area, it was a disused hospital.
That came to nothing because it was developed as residential
but it did eventually introduce us to the Chelmsford Council.
And then the planning authority said,
well, we can't help you with that one.
But have you thought about this one?
The brothers were looking everywhere they could see
but this was, in effect, an invisible site.
It was a site that we hadn't even looked at
and wasn't even on our radar.
So this is another area where we felt
that Jehovah's Hand was evident.
The development on that site was already approved for 69,300 square metres
and a brief was 70,000 square metres.
Having looked at so many other sites
where some doors would open
but others would remain shut,
to then come across a property, a site,
where all the doors opened.
You knew this was different.
You knew this was the right one.
Another aspect of the work that was done to secure this site
was there was a lot of peripheral properties
which were strategic.
And we're useful to us in setting up site works
and in perhaps removing potential opposition
to our planning application.
For construction reasons, we needed staging,
we needed accommodation, we needed access points,
we needed buffer, those properties became available.
Just where we needed them, when we needed them.
It seemed that every single one of them had a reason
why they were contemplating selling up at that time.
So it wasn't just the branch property itself,
it was all the facilitating properties around
becoming available at the same time.
Again, it was remarkable, unprecedented.
None of them were actually on the market.
I see that too as another evidence of Jehovah's blessing.
A principle issue in the negotiation was the issue of contamination.
I was stumped with the absolute chaos and mess that it was.
So we negotiated a reduction in the purchase price.
The way the negotiations went, it was evidence to me of Jehovah's hand.
We had a specialist company do a full survey of the site
and they commented there is a barrier of clay across the whole site.
If it would have been chalk or limestone or sandstone
it wouldn't be able to build on that property.
There was a lot of obstacles to overcome.
And those were overcome little by little,
but we started to see Jehovah's hand as seemingly impossible.
Obstacles began to be removed.
Psalm 127 and verse 1 says,
unless Jehovah builds the house,
it is in vain that the builders work hard on it.
Seeing Jehovah's direction first hand through the various phases
convinces us that the success of this project is not dependent
on favorable circumstances,
the skill of the workers,
or even the hard work of those involved.
Building this new branch is only possible because of Jehovah's blessing.